---
layout: post
title: Piping frames from PyMOL to Libav
---

Yesterday I decided to address a point of annoyance in generating molecular visualization videos. Namely, the creation of hordes of raw image frames which I would immediately discard after video composition.

Through the use of a UNIX named pipe, I circumvented the need for large numbers of intermediate frame files in the creation of video by piping output as it was generated by PyMOL into `libav` (formerly `ffmpeg`). What follows should illustrate named pipe handling in python, as well as named pipe input in `libav`.

### Standard workflow for creating video

  1. Launch PyMOL.
  2. Prepare for frame generation, may be combination of manual adjustment in session and writing of script.
  3. Execute script to generate **lots** of frame images for video.
  4. Do something else productive, the above will probably take a while...
  5. Create your video using `avconv` (formerly `ffmpeg`); command builds from backbone of `avconv -i frame%0nd.png my_video.mp4`.
  6. Throw those frame images away! (could be using anywhere from 10MB to 1GB or more)

### New workflow with named pipe

  1. Launch PyMOL.
  2. Prepare for frame generation, may be combination of manual adjustment in session and writing of script.
  3. Launch `avconv` with named pipe input; command builds from backbone of `avconv -f image2pipe -c:v png -i <named-pipe> my_video.mp4`.
  4. Execute script, sending each frame to `<named-pipe>` as generated.
  5. Do something else productive, the above will probably take a while...
